WIP: See https://wiki.python.org/moin/SummerOfCode/OrgIdeasPageTemplate

Welcome to Qtile!  In addition to this page, you can also look at the [PSF GSoC
page](https://wiki.python.org/moin/SummerOfCode/2015) for more information.  The
PSF wiki also has [expectations of GSoC
students](https://wiki.python.org/moin/SummerOfCode/Expectations) which applies
to any potential project.

##### Table of Contents

* [About Qtile](#about-qtile)
    * [Contact Us](#contact-us)
* [Getting Started](#getting-started)
* [Writing Your Application](#writing-your-application)
* [Project Ideas](#project-ideas)
* [Possible Mentors](#possible-mentors)
* [GSoC Questionnaire](#gsoc-questionnaire)

# About Qtile

Qtile is a full-featured, hackable tiling window manager written and configured
in Python.  As a tiling window manager, Qtile is designed to be very
lightweight; however, it has a very powerful configuration and scripting
interface.  The look and feel of Qtile is set with a Python config file, and
Qtile ships with a base set of widgets and layouts that can be set-up, but users
are also able to add functionality to existing widgets or create their own
widgets and layouts.  In addition, Qtile exposes all of the functionality of
the window manager through a scripting interface, such that events normally run
on the keyboard or with the mouse can be triggered through scripts, made
possible by the powerful introspection features of Python.  This also allows
for unit testing of Qtile, that it properly displays windows, and layouts, that
they properly move and position windows.  By using Python, Qtile is very
extensible and users can easily modify or add functionality as they see fit.

## Contact Us

If you are interested in working with Qtile (whether for GSoC or not), you can
join our mailing list, where we both discuss development issues and provide
help to users.  You can also contact us through IRC, which is where most of our
development discussion takes place.  The links to these are:

Mailing List: http://groups.google.com/group/qtile-dev

IRC: [irc://irc.oftc.net:6667/qtile](irc://irc.oftc.net:6667/qtile)

# Getting started

The first thing you will need to do to get started hacking on Qtile is to get
it installed.  Qtile has a small list of dependencies, primarily other Python
libraries, you can see the full guide to installing Python [in our
documentation](http://qtile.readthedocs.org/en/latest/manual/install/index.html).

Next, you will need to get yourself setup on GitHub.  We use git for version
control and our development takes place on GitHub.  Github has some [great help
pages](https://help.github.com/) to help get you setup with an account and
forking our [main repository](https://github.com/qtile/qtile/).  We have guides
for our recommended [contribution
workflow](http://qtile.readthedocs.org/en/latest/manual/contributing.html) and
on [hacking and
testing](http://qtile.readthedocs.org/en/latest/manual/hacking.html) the
changes you make.

Now that you are up and running, you can try to [configure
Qtile](http://qtile.readthedocs.org/en/latest/manual/config/index.html) to your
liking.  You can check out our [open
issues](https://github.com/qtile/qtile/issues) if you want somewhere to start
hacking, or feel free add functionality, make improvements, and fix bugs as you
see fit.  You can always [contact other developers](#contact-us) if you need
any help getting setup and running Qtile or would like to discuss your project.

# Writing your application

After introducing yourself and getting setup with Qtile, you will have to draft
up your application.  You will have to submit a proposal on the [Google Summer
of Code website](http://www.google-melange.com/). (TODO: Add details when
mentor orgs are selected).  A good application should address:

## Your personal background

What is your name and current University enrollment.  You can include a short
bio.  Here, you should say how we can contact you, things like email address,
IRC handle, GitHub username, and Google Melange username.

## Your programming background

Let us know what sort of programming experience you have.  Do not worry if you
are not familiar or do not have experience with Qtile or git/GitHub.  Here, you
can highlight any past projects that you have worked on.  In particular, you
should mention things that may be related to your proposal, such as Python
projects you have developed or experience with git or some other version
control system.

## Your project

This should form the bulk of you proposal.  You need to detail what you want to
achieve, what you need to create, what you can use from elsewhere, and what the
final product will look like.  Note that you should not just copy text off this
page, you should formulate your project in your own way.

First, you should give some background on your project.  You will have to
explain what your project is and why it is important to Qtile.  Emphasize any
experience you have with subject matter (even if you have stated it in your
background).  While you do not need to start on your project, you will need to
do enough research on it to show that you are capable of completing it.

You should note what work has been done, within Qtile, within the Python
community, or elsewhere, relating to your project.  Especially if your project
involves interfacing with external projects, you should outline what has been
done with these projects, if there are any improvements that will need to be
made, and how you intend to make those improvements.  If your project involves
reworking something within Qtile, you should outline the current setup, where
it is lacking, and how your project will improve this.

You should detail what you intend to implement.  The more details you can give
here, the better.  The most important thing is what you will deliver as your
final product.  If this involves any user-facing API, you can discuss what the
expected behavior will be.  Depending on what your project is, you could
include pseudo-code classes and methods detailing what you want to implement.
Again, the greater detail you can provide, the stronger your application.

You should also include a general timeline for your project.  You should state
when your classes are done and you intend to start work on your project, note
the [official GSoC
calendar](http://www.google-melange.com/gsoc/events/google/gsoc2015) has the
program running from May 25 to August 21, and includes both a midterm and final
review, both of which should be factored in.  We know that things can change
and unforeseen problems can arise, so we will not hold you strictly to this
timeline, but you should estimate how long you think things will take, and in
particular show that you can fill a full summer.  How much do you intend on
working during the program? (hint: it should be 40 hours per week).  If you
have any planned trips or times you will not be able to work full-time, we need
to know about them upfront, and you should outline when you intend on making up
any lost time.  If there is any preliminary research or things you would like
before the program start, you can outline them.  Note that you should allow
time for scrubbing code and writing documentation (less readable, well
documented code will always be better than more unreadable, undocumented code).
You may also want to note good points to merge code, it is much easier to do
several smaller merges throughout the summer than get caught trying to do one
big merge as the project winds down.

# Patch requirement

(Sean: do we want something like a patch requirement just to show that students applying know how to set their system up and use git/GitHub?)

# Project Ideas

Here are some potential ideas we have thought may be appropriate, however, feel
free to propose an idea to us that you are interested in.

## An asyncio-based DBus library.

As a part of the 0.9.0 release, we [dropped all C extensions as hard
dependencies](../blob/develop/CHANGELOG#L3), including dropping the PyGTK/GLib
event loop in favor of the new Python asyncio event loop.  However, several of
the widgets, such as the MPRIS widget, rely on D-Bus, and the [python-dbus
library](http://dbus.freedesktop.org/doc/dbus-python/) is [hard
coded](http://cgit.freedesktop.org/dbus/dbus-python/tree/dbus/mainloop/glib.py)
to use the gobject event loop.  We have come up with a
[hack](https://github.com/qtile/qtile/commit/82256a47b9f954b2bb9922b821dfd6d529dc5437)
to get around this limitation by wrapping the GLib event loop, however, it is
not ideal (in addition to being a bit of a hack, it means those widgets cannot
run in Qtile on PyPy).

The point of this project is to implement a D-Bus library that can work
directly with asyncio (and preferably other future event loops).  In other
words, this would be writing a pure Python D-Bus binding that can be configured
to fire off asyncio calls.  Tools such as cffi could be used to make the
necessary libdbus calls (this is what we did with
[xcffib](https://github.com/tych0/xcffib) to get rid of the xpyb dependency).

This project is not really Qtile specific, but will be needed by the general
python community going forward if the asyncio event loop is going take hold.

**Skills:**

Python, C (or at least C bindings in Python), and some understanding of how
D-Bus works.

**Difficulty:**

Medium/Hard. Although this will be very exciting because it will be a
from-scratch project, that means it will also be difficult because you will
have to design an entirely new codebase, including FFI to C.

**Related Links:**

* [Python asycio library](https://docs.python.org/3/library/asyncio.html)
* [gbulb](https://bitbucket.org/a_ba/gbulb), a Python 3.3+ library that wraps
  the GLib event loop in asyncio (but that we have not been able to get working
  with qtile)
* Current [python-dbus](http://dbus.freedesktop.org/doc/dbus-python/) C extension
* [CFFI](https://cffi.readthedocs.org/) could be used to call libdbus

## Experimental Wayland support

Wayland is the way forward, so it would be good to start working on
experimental support for it to see just how much of Qtile is re-usable.
The real value of Qtile is in the user contributed widgets, so we would like to
preserve that code going forward.

Preferably, we would be able to run Qtile as a standalone window manager, not
as a Weston shell.  This would require breaking out a lot of the current window
handling code into some abstraction layer that can be configured to run with
wither X or Wayland.  This would be a massive overhaul touching many points in
the codebase.

For this to work at all, we need Python bindings to libwayland, and maybe some
other Python libraries to do everything that needs to be done.  There is some
support for making language bindings for the Wayland
[server](http://cgit.freedesktop.org/wayland/wayland/commit/?id=c44090908db1c4f1b0e87bda2e4fdaa6bc15c0d1)
and
[client](http://cgit.freedesktop.org/wayland/wayland/commit/?id=eb947e9408c149041c4c8e1c80ef9ebea049f477),
but such bindings would may need to be implements. If you are interested in this
project, the first thing that should be addressed is what of the necessary tools
exist and what would need to be developed.

**Skills:**

Python, some understanding of Wayland (including the relevant C libraries
therein)

**Difficulty:**

Hard. Very few of us (if any) have any experience with Wayland, although we are
learning about the API. The student will likely need to take the lead on any
confusing Wayland issues and potentially work with their ML on any bugs that
arise.

**Related Links:**

* Resources available from Wayland http://wayland.freedesktop.org/

* [Wayland language binding
  guide](http://www.jlekstrand.net/jason/projects/wayland/language-bindings-guide/)
  and related resources from Ekstrand's Java bindings

## Better layout serialization

Qtile currently does not serialize layout state across restarts and does not
maintain order and focus between layout changes, and it would be nice to have
that. For restarts, it may be possible to just pickle and pass the state of
each layout, but this would probably also involve a re-design of the layout
code to share some implementation pieces of the window shape(s).

**Skills:**

Python, good software design

**Difficulty:**

Easy. This one is really just an exercise in software design. Qtile's layout
code has grown over the years to incorporate lots of different options,
functions, overrides, etc., without anyone really sitting down to redesign
things. 

**Related Links:**

* Various bugs related to layouts:
  [#372](https://github.com/qtile/qtile/issues/372),
  [#473](https://github.com/qtile/qtile/issues/473),
  [#549](https://github.com/qtile/qtile/issues/549)

## Refactor window focusing

Properly routing focus and grabbing input is no simple task X, while Qtile is
able to properly deal with simple cases like using the mouse or keyboard to
select an open window, there are definitely places where we do not deal with
input appropriately.  Things like the [prompt
widget](http://qtile.readthedocs.org/en/latest/manual/ref/widgets.html#libqtile.widget.Prompt)
should be able to grab focus without other windows taking it back.  There are
also external panels which control window focus that do not work properly with
Qtile.  Just like the layout code, Qtile has adapted where it could, but it
would be great if the focusing could be overhauled to work correctly with
external programs and be extensible enough for things like the prompt widget to
function as expected.

**Skills:**

Python, good software design, maybe familiarity with X

**Difficulty:**

Easy/Medium.  Just like the layout project, a lot of this project will be
designing a same way to deal with layout that meets our needs.  This is a bit
trickier as it requires properly dealing with X events and input.

**Related Links:**

* Focusing issues coming up related to cursor warp:
  [#538](https://github.com/qtile/qtile/issues/538)
* Issue dragging windows with multiple screens
  [#297](https://github.com/qtile/qtile/issues/297)
* [Github issues mentioning
  focus](https://github.com/qtile/qtile/issues?q=focus+in%3Atitle+is%3Aissue+is%3Aopen),
  in particular [#444](https://github.com/qtile/qtile/issues/444)
* EWMH `_NET_ACTIVE_WINDOW`
  [hint](http://standards.freedesktop.org/wm-spec/latest/ar01s03.html#idm139870830075168)
* ICCCM [discussion of input
  focus](http://tronche.com/gui/x/icccm/sec-4.html#s-4.1.7)

## Quick Jump to Windows in a Group by Window Title Search 

This would be very useful if you have a lot of windows in a group and you want
to focus quickly to the current window without navigating trough the panes / or
zapping trough application in the maximum-size layout. Imagine, you can type /f
to get quickly to the open Firefox window in the group (like in VIM jumping to
a text passage), and so on. Let us discuss this idea!

**Skills:**

**Difficulty:**

**Related Links:**

# Possible Mentors

Below are possible mentors for any of the above projects (IRC nick is in parens):

* Tycho Andersen (tych0)
* Sean Vig (IRC: svig) (melange: flacjacket)
* Roger Duran (rogerduran)
* Daniel Barrio (dx)

# GSoC Questionnaire
> Why is your organization applying to participate in Google Summer of Code 2015? What do you hope to gain by participating?*

More interested contributors and patch reviewers. Qtile development velocity 
has picked up over the last year or so, and GSoC seems like a nice way to
procure more interest.

> How many potential mentors do you have for this year's program? What criteria did you use to select them?*

Four. All of the mentors have been involved with the project for at least a 
year (some at least three years), and have contributed major enhancements and
fixed non-trivial bugs.

> What is your plan for dealing with disappearing students?*

We'd like to have students publish their patches at least once a week, so that 
they can be reviewed by the community. Also, getting them involved on IRC with
our discussions seems like the best way to keep them from disappearing in the
first place.

> What is your plan for dealing with disappearing mentors?*

We have four people who have volunteered to mentor, and will likely only be 
interested in one project slot, so we have some redundancy there. Additionally,
all of our maintainers have been active in the project for a long time, and are
unlikely to disappear without warning.

> What steps will you take to encourage students to interact with your project's community before and during the program?*

Have them join our IRC channel. Our channel is quite active, and lots of bugs 
and development ideas are discussed there, so it is quite easy to give input in
realtime or ask questions about implementation details.

> What will you do to encourage your accepted students to stick with the project after Google Summer of Code concludes?*

Be active in providing constructive feedback for their patches during the 
program. Students applying to GSoC are likely interested in sharpening their
skills, so if we show them that our community is a good place to do that, we
think they'll stay involved with the project.

> Are you a new organization who has a Googler or other organization to vouch for you? If so, please list their name(s) here.

I (tych0) have one friend, but please contact me off-list if there is anyone else who could potentially be listed.